Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm here with a repeat guest, Dr. Nathan
Lentz. Last time we talked about his book Human
Errors, and today we're talking about his latest book,
The Sexual Evolution How 500 Million Years of Sex,
Gender, and Mating Shaped Modern Relationships. So, Dr. Lentz,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to everyone.
Thanks very much, and it's a pleasure to be
back.
OK, so, I mean, you go through lots of
different things in the booklet. I will try to
focus just on a handful of them because we
only have an hour today. So, uh, let's, uh,
let me start just with a general question. What
can we learn by looking at the natural history
of sex?
Well, uh, we can learn a lot, and I
think that, um, only recently have we really begun
to appreciate. Uh, THE full diversity of sex in
the animal world. And so we know that, um,
you know, sex evolved in microscopic organisms first, uh,
simply as a way to combine two genomes. And
what that allows you to do, it seems simple,
right? But you have to remember that prior to
sexual reproduction, everything reproduced by some version of cloning.
Basically 11 cell kind of splitting into two that
were more or less equal to each other and
the same as what as what pre-existed, but sexual
reproduction changed everything because when you combine the genome
of two individuals, it allows you to over time
select the best, the best versions of all of
the genes. So, you know, if, if a small
bacterium has, I don't know, let's say 10,000 genes
or 5000 genes, there can be different versions of
those genes. Circulating in a gene pool, right? And,
and we, we today, we take this for granted,
the idea that there's, uh, you know, different versions
of genes circulating in a gene pool. But there
was a time on Earth when that was a
new thing, and you can imagine what a huge
advantage it was, because when you have two versions
of every gene, for example, in an individual, what
that allows you to do is have a backup
copy, right? So one copy can, can hold the
original function, and then the second copy is free
to sort. Of take on different possible forms and
different functions. And when you have that, that safety
backup, that is the recipe for creative innovation. And
so you can have, and it's random when it
begins, but then nature selects for those really good
versions that occasionally come about. Now let me tell
you why that's so powerful. Once you have creativity
built in, every generation, you're constantly generating new combinations
of genes, new versions of genes, and then nature.
CAN act on it, and it allows evolution to
really ramp up. And that's not long after sexual
reproduction first emerged was when you saw creatures get
much more complicated, much more complex, much more sophisticated,
and that happened very quickly thereafter. And the key
to that is diversity, right? Just having diverse versions
of genes and combinations, and it allows all of
this exploration. Now fast forward to the evolution of
animals, right? And I do. Concentrate exclusively on animals
in my book because even though, you know, plants
and fungi reproduce sexually, they don't engage in what
I call behavior, right? So they don't, they're not
out there moving around and so the behavior of
sex is really what, what I'm focusing on in
my book. So fast forward from the invention of
sexual reproduction to animals, and then what you have
is something that we've always known, which is diversity
is good for a population. It's good for a
species, even though individuals. MAY or may not benefit
from their particular kind of diversity. In fact, actually,
when we're talking about genetic diversity, a lot of
times it's bad, right, to have different versions of
genes, but for the species overall, it's really good,
and that's what allowed animals to go all different
directions, you know. They went onto the land, they
went back into the sea. Some of them came
back on the land again, and, you know, they,
you know, learned to fly. They all kinds of
creative innovation comes about purely because we have sexual
reproduction now. Unfortunately, when we have been studying sex
and and sex behaviors and sexual evolution, we've always
been kind of with this lens of, well, we
have males and we have females, and males have
this kind of strategy and they want to sort
of do this thing, and females have this strategy
and they want to be this or do this.
And that leads to what I call optimal thinking,
where there's one best way to be a male
and all the males are trying to be this,
and there's one best way to be a female
and all the females are trying to be this.
And of course competition is, is, is a thing.
It's, it's certainly out there in nature. But what
we, we, but when you take your blinders off
and stop thinking about archetypes, like stop, stop thinking
about optimization and just think about diversity, what you
really see when you look out in nature is
a variety of kinds of males and different strategies
that are successful when one is a male. And
then there's a variety of strategies and ways to
be successful as a female. And as animals explore
these different ways of being, everything we thought we
knew about sex roles or gender roles kind of
goes out the window because we see examples of
animals doing it all kinds of different ways. And,
and this is important, and I'll finally wrap up
this answer, the maleness and femaleness, the strategies start
to overlap and you start to see. See that
you can move in and out of various sex
behaviors and find success. And there's, and I give
lots of examples in my book of animals, um,
taking on these sort of diverse strategies, diverse roles,
diverse morphologies, meaning their physical appearance, and it's not
tied to a specific way of being. That really
creativity is rewarded by nature time and time again.
OK, so we're going to talk about some of
those things and I want to get into the
topic of sex and gender and how they differ,
but my first question is, because I want to
take it step by step, what does biological sex
mean for evolutionary biologists? I mean, how do you
distinguish between male and females? Is it on the
basis of gametes, Gnets, sex chromosomes, or some other
criteria?
You are getting at the heart of a. Really
raging debate right now in the field of biology.
How do we define,
I know, I know, I'm aware of that.
How do we define biological sex? And again, because
of that kind of optimized thinking, um, there really
wasn't much controversy until about 20 or 30 years
ago where most, you know, you think, well, males
make sperm and then everything else we associate with
that, that's maleness, and then females make eggs and
everything associated with that, um, is female. But what
we're finding is Defining maleness and femaleness based purely
on gametes, that's just one way to do it.
And that's, we, we like that way because it's
very binary. It's very clear, it's very simple. An
animal either makes eggs or sperm or both. And
by the way, lots of animals can make both
or do make both, it's especially in invertebrates, but
even marine mammals, you see examples of hermaphroditism. So
that's the ability to make both gametes either at
the same time or at different times. In your
life history. So, by the way, that right off
the bat, binary doesn't quite work, um, when you,
when you consider how common hermaphroditism is in the
animal world. So at least you have three sexes,
right? If you're gonna use gametes. And we like
gametes because they are, you
would count, uh, sorry to interrupt you, but you
would count hermaphroditism as a third sex. Oh, I
think it has to be. If you're defining the
whole animal based on which gamete it makes, you
have sperm, egg, or both. So you could say
that they're both male and female at the same
time, but then you're not binary still, right? So
you could consider hermaphroditism a third kind of comedian.
Sex and this introduces this term gametic sex. So
an animal's gametic sex is which sperm, I mean,
sorry, which gamete they make one, the other, or
both. But that's just one way to define it,
as you mentioned, we also define sex based on
chromosomes. We also define sex based on certain genes
which may or may not be on the sex
chromosome. We can also define animals by their genital
anatomy. We can define them by. Other anatomy throughout
their body, which associates with one sex or the
other, uh, their hormone levels, like, and, and ratios,
there's lots of ways to define sex. And what,
what we find when we measure these across animals
is that besides the sperm and egg, it's not
really that simple, right? Let's, let's take, um, let's
take breast size in humans, because that is a
very dimmorphic feature, meaning males and females have. Very
different averages when it comes to the size of
their breast. But if you map the size of
breasts of women on a bell curve and the
size of breasts on a man and a bell
curve, you will find that they overlap, that they
overlap quite a bit. There are females who have
smaller breasts than some males, vice versa, and you
have that. You have a bimodal distribution. OK, well,
that's breast size. What about genital anatomy? You actually
end up with the same thing. And the degree
of overlap can be different. Let's talk about hormone
ratios. Once again, you get two bell curves that
overlap. And so what you end up with is
this continuous spectrum. Sometimes, the two humps of the
curves are very obviously separated. Sometimes they bleed. Into
one another. Like if you look at, for example,
waist hip ratio, or if you look at body
hair distribution, these things are not simply clear cut.
Now, some, some would argue, well, that's just variation
of sex-based features. It doesn't change the sex of
the individual. Well, here's how I, here's my counter
to that argument. Um, IF you put everything on
gametes, then you collapse all of that other diversity
into two buckets, and not individuals don't always fit
in their respective, respective bucket. And when, when they
don't fit into that bucket, you're forced to make
a decision. You say, well, this animal behaves like
a female, like most females, like typical females, has
the body shape of a female, the genital anatomy
of a female, and you keep going through this
list, but because they make sperm, they're in the
other bucket, which doesn't make sense for 99% of
that animal's life history, what they're doing, how they're
behaving. How other animals interact with them. There's a
whole different, a whole group of ways in which
they don't fit their bucket. And does it make
sense to force them into a bucket simply because
of the gametes? Why does gametes trump everything else?
And I especially think this applies to humans, because
I want you to think about your daily life,
how you live your life, how you interact with
others. Lots of things are. Sex different when it
comes to that. But how often are the gametes
important for that? How often do the gametes affect
your health and disease or your social interactions? There
are diseases that women get far more often than
men. There are diseases that men get more often
than women. They have different health risks, different health
outcomes, and your physician, you know, really needs to
know your biological sex in order to give you
the best care. None of that has to do
with sperm or eggs. Right, but it does have
to do with hormone ratios and red blood cell
count and body fat distribution and, and all kinds
of other things that, that show these sex differences.
Those are much more important to your health, disease,
your social interactions. And so acknowledging that sex exists
on this continuous spectrum. Um, ALLOWS sort of people
to have a better fit with their biological sex
and their, and better understanding of it. And remember,
there are people who are very much in the
middle, uh, on a lot of these features. We,
sometimes when it affects the genital anatomy, in particular,
we call them intersex individuals, uh, because we really
focus on genital anatomy. That's all that matters, right?
Um, BUT even if you just want to focus
on that. What do we do with intersex individuals?
Do we say they don't count? Do we say
their sex is not important? Do they say ignore
everything about them except just look at which sperm
they make or eggs? That's silly. That makes no
sense. And it also erases them and forces them
into an existence that doesn't match what really matters
to their life, including their health. So acknowledging that
sex is a continuous spectrum with these Bimodal distribution,
it doesn't deny sex differences. It really elevates sex
differences as important, important for us to understand. So
how we define maleness and femaleness is not so
simple, and we shouldn't be afraid of it just
because it is complicated. People like simple categories with
hard boundaries and definitions and clear separation. Sorry, that's
not how life works. It just really doesn't very
often fit into these nice categories. So I opened
my book with a story about why definitions and
categories often get in the way of our understanding.
They collapse diversity and they erase variability and variation,
which, of course, to harken back to my first
answer is nature loves diversity and variety. It's the,
it's the secret to all innovation.
Yeah, you said that this is an ongoing debate
about whether sex is binary or not, and uh
I've had on the show Doctor Agustin Fuentes, who
released the book Sex Is a Spectrum. I talked
a lot about that with him and more recently
I've had Doctor Herman Ponzer on the show, a
biological anthropologist, and he told me that he thought
that uh the arguments put forth by people who
argue. That sex is non-binary are sound scientific arguments,
but he doesn't agree with the conclusion because he
thinks that it is not helpful to say that
sex is non-binary because he says that there are
two main paths in terms of sexual development. And
then, soon I will also have on the show
Doctor Edward Hagen because he wrote a critique of
Doctor Fuentes's. Book Sex is a Spectrum and the
10, I, I think he agrees mostly with Doctor
Herman Ponzer even though Doctor Herman Ponzer also said,
as you did, that it's very hard to precisely
define femaleness and maleness. So, uh, I, I mean,
yeah,
and, and, uh, Augustine Fuentes is a friend of
mine, and, uh, and we're working on an article
together that I think outlines this, what we're saying
and what we're not saying. Uh, A little bit
better, but I do acknowledge that there's different ways
of thinking about this, and some very, very smart
people disagree with me on this, and including, um,
you know, some biologists who study gender diversity, um,
the, the, what, what it comes down to, honestly,
is semantics about what, what we mean when we
say biological sex. If you Define biological sex as
which gamete you make, then it's simple. All we're
arguing for is that biological sex is important in
lots of things throughout your body and throughout your
life. And so to make it all about gametes,
to me, it becomes unhelpful as a category. And
also there is already a term for that, gamedic
sex. Right, we have chromosomal sex, genetic sex, genital
sex, gametic sex. That's already there. That's a term
that already exists, and we can define people by
their gametic sex relatively neatly and cleanly. So that's
fine. What we're saying is sex is much more
interesting and complicated than just what goes on in
the gonads, right? There's sex biology all throughout our
bodies and our social interactions, right? We are a
biocultural species and we navigate. THROUGH the world differently
based on our sex, and none of that has
to do with which gametes are being made, right?
It has to do with how people treat you,
how you understand your own body, how your body
relates to other bodies, and that's all we're, that's
all we're saying. And if we come back to,
well, we're going to call, we're going to define
things on more precise categories, gametic sex, chromosomal sex,
and then that way we can acknowledge some of
those categories are binary, some of them are continuous.
If we do that, that's fine. We're happy with
that too.
OK, so as an evolutionary biologist, how do you
approach gender? What is gender? Because I've had this
conversation on the show, but it was mostly with,
uh, you know, evolutionary anthropologists, cultural anthropologists, anthropologists in
general. But as an evolutionary biologist, uh, what do
you have to say about that?
So, um, there's again, very complicated because as we
apply gender to humans and the anthropologists that you've
interviewed, you know, would be, would be focusing on
the human experience of gender, um, yeah, it's this
constructed reality regarding sex and one's one's relationship with,
with their body and their sex. AND their identity
and their outward expression, but in animals, you can't
quite ask that question of how they feel. But
what you can do is ask how they behave.
And a good another friend of mine, Joan Roughgarden,
has advanced this idea that animal gender has to
do with how an animal approaches reproductive biology. Um,
AND, and, and it's not just their bodies. So,
so she is very willing to admit to simple
classifications based on sex and then much more complicated
classifications based on gender. Only she'll agree with that
only if we apply gender to animals and recognize
that animals have been exploring different ways of being
male and different ways of being female. They've been
doing that for hundreds of millions of years, hence
the title of my book. And, and so Joan
Roughgarard advances the idea of sex. Gender are two
different concepts even in animals and even invertebrate worms,
for example, can have a sex biology which is
focused on gametes, and then gender, which has to
do with behavior, which has to do with mating,
which has to do with parenting, which has to
do with pair bonding, you know, parental relationships, sibling
relationships. So that would be an animal's gender. And
so she sees that an animal can be male,
but there can be flavors of male. There can
be 3 or 4 different kinds of males, and
that would be their gender, right? So, their sex
can be male because they make sperm, and their
gender can be, um, you know, different varieties, and
you would have to name these morphs, uh, you
know, something. So that's one way to, and I
support that very much. I like the idea of
applying gender to animals because it acknowledges that physical
things like bodies are one thing, but how that
gets expressed in a population and, and, and especially
in regard to interactions. Um, THAT could be gender,
and that, that would resolve this conflict as well.
That's another way to sort of piece this together
in a way that we can all live with,
I think, is acknowledging that sex and gender are
different but related and that it does apply to
animals. And that's where you'll lose a lot of
evolutionary biologists as well, because they, a lot of
evolutionary biology is in many ways the most conservative
scientific discipline in the life sciences anyway, because there
is this optimization thinking about male and female. So
that's baked into the field. It's changing. It's very
much changing, but that, that's in there. And the
other thing that's in there is that, oh, animals
don't have anything to do with gender. That's a,
that's a human thing. Fine, humans can construct gender,
but animals don't. And what Joan Roughgarden has argued,
I think very powerfully, is that animals. Construct gender
as well. Their interactions with each other based on
sex biology creates this, this diverse way of being
male and female, and, and some of it is
ingrained genetically. There are different forms of male sometimes.
Some of it is behavioral, some of it is
learned. So throughout the cultural history that an animal
is experiencing, and to me and to Joan, that
looks like gender. The interaction of physical, social, psychological,
you know, all of that mixed in creates this
unified identity, diverse but unified, that's gender. And if
we apply that framework to animals, you don't have
to ask how they think or how they feel
or how they express. You can just watch what
they do, and you'll see that that diversity naturally
emerges when you're open to it. But if you
view animals as if every male is trying to
be the apex type of male. Then you're gonna
miss a lot of that diversity. You're gonna dismiss
uh the others as suboptimal. I mean, uh, you
should see the language that some biologists use to
describe males that are just different, you know, they'll,
they'll say that they're suboptimal, they're runts, they're imperfect,
um, sometimes they're female mimics, if, if some of
their differences make them look a little bit like
females. Joan Roughgarten and I, that's all nonsense. What
you really see is diversity within the categories of
sex, and that diversity often leads to success, right?
These different forms persist. They're not just freaks. They're
not one-offs. They're a part of the natural diversity,
the natural toolkit that an animal has to try
to be successful.
Uh, By the way, in regards to sex, do
you, do you think that we should approach it,
uh, uh, from an evolutionary perspective, perspective as if
its own goal was to, uh, an individual to
reproduce? I mean, is reproduction the only goal of
sex?
Absolutely not. Although only if you think in the
broadest sense that everything you do is rep is,
is having to do with sex, right, or having
to do with sexual reproduction, having to do with
creating the next generation. And in a sense, everything
you do is designed to make you be successful,
either in surviving, reproducing, whatever. But the sex, I
think you mean the sex act itself, it is
not purely about procreation, right? So two individuals coming
together and having sex, and this is true for
animals and humans as well. Sometimes that is purposed
towards procreation, but lots of times it is not.
And if you consider in your own life, how
many times you've had sex, how many times of
those were with the goal of procreation, right? Very
few, many of us never. And, um, and that's
true for other animals as well. They have sex
for a variety of reasons. They have sex, you
know, let's start with the non-controversial ones. Pair bonded
animals have sex with each other to strengthen the
pair bond, to reduce interpair conflict, and to strengthen
the attachment because we know that animals become attached
with one another for the same reason humans do
through hormones in the brain, vasopressin, oxytocin, and other
ones as well, norepinephrine, serotonin. There are hormones involved
in attachment, and those operate in animals. In fact,
we discovered. All that in animals and their attachment,
and we know that sexual activity strengthens that in
certain contexts. So that's the simple non-controversial one right
off the bat, we all know that sex does
more for us as individuals than just create the
next generation. But let's go beyond that. Animals also
have groups, also have sex in social groups among
the members, and there's lots of examples of how.
That sexual activity reduces aggression. It reduces conflict. It
resolves conflicts. Sometimes it's even somewhat competitive, meaning it's
used, sex can be used to establish a dominance
hierarchy, right? And if you look at the way
that male lions, when male lions, many of them
exist in these multi-male coalitions, that's not just a
single male in every lion pride. Lots of. Lion
prides have multiple males, but they are ranked. Lions
are an aggressive species, and they have sex with
each other as a way to establish dominance, and
it kind of looks like a wrestling match, right?
And you might look at that and you say,
well, that's not really sex then, that's a dominant
struggle. It's both. How can you not call it
sex when it's penetrative, it reaches climax. But people
don't want to consider it sex because it doesn't
lead to procreation. Well, if you define sex as
only that which leads to procreation, OK, then fine,
but that means that I've never had sex in
my life. I've, trust me, I have, right? Sex
is sex, right? We know what sex is and
and the goal of it is not what makes
it sex, it's the act itself. And so, uh,
animals have sex for a whole variety of reasons.
Some of them are, um, 00, and, and to
return to the lions one last moment, you might
ask why they do that is, well, It sure
beats fighting to the death, right? Because when animals
establish dominance by fighting to the death, even the
winner will be injured, right? And potentially, and, and
it's, it's, they're worse off if that's their way.
But if they use sex as a way with
an outcome that's very different, where everyone walks away
happy. The submissive, you know, the loser has to
submit to the more aggressive male, so you still
establish the same goals, but you do that in
a more pro-social way where everyone can walk away
a winner, meaning alive. So that's just one small
example. And then in the book, I Talk about
lots of other uses for sex, and not all
of them are prosocial. Some of times animals use
sex to deceive other members of their group. They
use sex to get an advantage. They use sex
to tire them out. They'll even trade sex for
resources. There are animals that will exchange sex. Um,
FOR food, for example, or nest building materials or
whatever is valuable to that animal. So once, once
there's a commodities market, sex is, uh, traded, uh,
for those commodities. And, um, and, and, and that's
normal and natural, right? So there's this tendency to
want to judge that, but why? You know, why?
Animals are just doing what they're doing.
So there's this, there's also transactional sex in non-human
animals.
Oh yes, absolutely. And we've known this for a
long time in the very simplistic sense. You'll see
invertebrate animals, a lot of times, um, a male
will have to give a gift of sufficient quality
in order to convince a female to mate with
him. So those are called nuptial gifts, and we've
known about this for a long time. Sometimes they
have to hunt and find something. Sometimes they make
it themselves. They actually have secretions like that they
offer as payment for sexual acts. So we've known
about that for a long time in invertebrates and
other simple animals, but what we also see in
vertebrates, including our closest relative chimpanzees, chimpanzees will do
favors for each other in the hopes of gaining
sexual activity, including exchanging meat, right? So chimpanzees are
mostly vegetarian, you know, they eat leaves and sticks
and things, but they will occasionally eat monkey meat.
They will hunt small monkeys and eat them. And
it has been shown that chimpanzees, male chimpanzees can
buy sexual access from females by giving her gifts.
So I talk about that in the book. I
talk about some baboons that will exchange grooming for
sex, and then of course the famous one is
the penguins who will in Antarctica will exchange sex
for rocks that are used to build nests. So
they're rocks. You know, are not all equal. Some
rocks are very good for nest building, and those
become, you know, a commodity that females can actually
gain access to by offering sex in exchange for
nest building material. So once sex becomes important to
an animal, there will be exchanges, and there's a
market for these exchanges, and humans did not invent
sex work, the oldest profession indeed.
OK, so with uh all of what you said
about um the non-reproductive goals of sex in mind,
how should we approach homosexuality in animals from an
evolutionary perspective then?
Right, well, when you consider that the only benefit
of sex that wouldn't apply to same-sex sexual behavior
is procreation, but all of the other forms, all
of the other benefits, all the other gains that
you can have from same-sex sexual behavior are still
going to be there. It would be weird if
an animal didn't ever engage in it. I mean,
think about it this way I can gain an
advantage or a relationship or a dominance position. What
if I don't engage in this activity, the only
thing that I'm, the only thing that happens is
the cost, right? I've, I've missed the opportunity to
have this relationship with half of the group. But
if another individual will have sex with either sex,
with either, with any animal, then they have a
natural advantage because they can build their, their social
network in more ways. That's just a simple example.
But when you consider that sex does perform lots
of other functions and has many other benefits. It
would be weird if it was only purposed at
50% of the population. And, but this, this introduces
the idea of what we call strict homosexuality, where
there's an aversion to opposite sex sex, and then
strict heterosexuality where there's an aversion to same-sex sex,
and it's the aversions that you don't really see
in nature the way you do in humans. Very
few animals would be averse. So essentially what you
could call is all animals are a little bit
bisexual or pansexual, right, because they don't have a
strict aversion, but they might have attraction. One more
one way or the other, and this has been
studied in great detail in bighorn sheep in the
in the American Northwest. Charles Roselli and others have
studied how that attraction takes shape in sheep, and
it is fairly restricted. It's fairly defined. There are
some animals who will really only engage with the
opposite sex or with the same sex, and those
are a minority. Most of them are somewhere in
the middle where they might have one way or
the other, but, you know, in a pinch, they'll
have sex with anyone. Um, AND I think that's
closer to the human experience, where more, more people
are probably more in the middle than we want
to admit, right? Because in, in polite society, we
don't really talk about, uh, sexual fluidity, although we're
getting there. We, we are really starting to, and
more and more people are starting to admit that,
well, I don't know if I'm perfectly straight or
perfectly gay. I'm attracted to this, I'm attracted to
that. But we, we live in a society that
really forces you to pick a, pick a side
and pick a team. And so those aversions do
get established in our childhood because if you're, let's
say you're mostly sort of heterosexually inclined, well, on
top of that natural inclination, you have strong social
consequences to expressing anything homosexual. So that affects how
your attraction. Take shape, right? Especially in a, in
a childhood during your formative years, if you see
nothing but harsh negativity applied towards same-sex sexual behavior,
you will internalize that, right? So imagine a world
that was free of all that coercion. I think
what you would see is that most individuals are
sort of in the middle. You might, you know,
go one way or the other, you know, or
different time periods, or maybe it's based more on
the individual or whatever. And just to wrap this
up. There are some mammal species that we don't
see any same-sex sexual behavior. And those are the
solitary animals. There's not very many solitary mammals because
we are naturally social. Social begins at birth with,
with breastfeeding, right? So nursing is an inherently social
act, right? So mammals are, are very social like
birds, very social, but there are a few species
that are solitary as adults. And in like orangutans
is the one that we're, we're closely, most closely
related to, but Tasmanian devils are the same. There's,
there's a few mammals that are truly solitary as
adults, and you don't see same-sex sexual behavior. So
to me, the exception proves the rule that when
you're not a social species, well, there really isn't
any benefit to sex besides procreation. Procreation, that's it,
if you're not social. But if you are social,
there's a whole variety of benefits that come from
sexual activity. So, so that's why in basically all
of those, we do see at least some same-sex
sexual behavior because There's nothing gained by being averse
to it, right? And there is potential gains by
being open to it. So that, that, that's, that's
my theories on orientation. I really don't believe in
sexual orientation as a natural phenomenon. It's certainly true
as a social phenomenon in, in humans. Like we
are, we are, we're all, you know, encouraged. TO
check a box and be something clear and distinct
because that gains you a community, that gains you
a solidarity that helps mark the borders of social
groups and humans do have this inherent inherent desire
to put people into groups and categories that we
can understand and define. We're back to that same
topic, but nature doesn't work that way.
OK, so we've already addressed homosexuality and same-sex behaviors.
Uh, WHAT would you say to people who, I
guess most of them follow on the conservative end
of the political spectrum when they claim that, um,
something like permanent monogamous marriage is not only the
proper way to make a family, but the bedrock
institution around which society is built.
OK, well, to the latter question, marriage as the
bedrock institution around society is built, can't argue with
that. In a lot of cultures, um, you know,
the, the primary social group is the natal family,
and, uh, the nuclear family is sometimes called. But
that is a social development that that came across
over time, particularly after farming and after the development
of civilization in the sense of where you had
property, land ownership, and commodities essentially. What, what we
see when we look across human cultures outside of
industrialized societies, we see a whole variety of family-making
behaviors. It's not a nuclear family as the only
way to be. If you consider humans. In their
pre-industrialized state, and that's what we see in other
animals as well. We see a whole variety of
family structures. You see cooperative alloe parenting. That's one
of my favorite examples. There are primates who really
care for each other's children almost indiscriminately, almost indiscriminately
with regard to genetic parentage. They just, you know,
raise children as a group. You see other kinds.
The structures where the males and females don't interact
socially much at all. They come together for procreation
and then they go back to their sex segregated
groups. So there's no such thing as a nuclear
family in those, in those animals. And so I
think most people who are interested in, you know,
permanent monogamous marriage, they're really only talking about humans.
You don't see. Very many models of that in
the animal world. There are a few. There are
a few animals who really create, um, you know,
a breeding pair and their children, and that's the
group, right? So copperrititi monkeys in South America, you
know, have that social structure, but that's not a
good model for ours. You know why? That group
does not interact with any other groups. They, that
is, that is a group, and if there's another
group, they are in conflict. There's territoriality. There's mutual
aggression. So that's not how we live. We do
live in families often, but those families aren't, aren't,
you know, isolated on a little island by themselves,
right? They live in a very intricate social web
of interactions, and individual members have their own relationships,
groups that have relationships with each other, and that's
closer to what you see in a lot of
other animals, even those that form a breeding pair.
But let me talk about monogamy since it's come
up a couple of times. So in humans, when
we talk about monogamy, we're mostly talking about sexual
fidelity, so sexual exclusivity within a relationship. And in
lots of communities, you know, people talk about monogamy
as just restricting sex between a pair. But that's
sexual monogamy. Social monogamy is what we see in
animals. We don't really see sexual monogamy that often.
There are some examples, but very rare. What you
see is social monogamy, which is the pairing up,
the enduring pair bond around which family making takes
place, homesteading, you might say, like building a nest,
building a den, and sometimes that lasts for a
breeding season if it's, you have seasonal behaviors like
you do in most of the northern hemisphere. Um,
BUT, or, or sometimes it lasts for a lifetime.
There are birds that will mate for a lifetime,
and that pair bond endures even when they migrate
separately. There are migratory birds where the males and
females do not migrate together, but they still find
each other when they get there, year after year
after year. It's amazing, and, and, and they're, they
are, birds are, are the role models of an
enduring pair bond. But it's not sexually exclusive. I'm
sorry to tell you. Most of these birds are
also engaging in sexual activity outside of that pair
bond, and that doesn't necessarily threaten the pair bond.
In some species, they will try to prevent that.
There's still, you know, jealousy, if you will. It's
still like a conflict. Um, YOU know, so they
might try to interfere with each other's extramarital sexual
activity, but the pair bond is still there, and
they still, you know, build their family together or
whatever it is they do. And so sexual monogamy
and social monogamy really have to be discussed on
different terms because they are different. Sometimes they go
together and in humans we've joined them like in
this kind of permanent situation where they can't be
extracted from each other. But the point I want
to make is that's a relatively new phenomenon to
join sexual and social monogamy as a As an
imperative and the only way to live. I'm sorry,
that is not natural. I'm not saying there's anything
wrong with it. It's fine. It's great, but to
say that that's the only way that that is
not supported biologically because we see across all the
other animals and including human societies that that are
free of this industrialized, you know, social norms, you
see a whole variety of relationships and sexual monogamy.
I'm sorry, it's pretty rare. Um, EVEN in other
human groups, it's just not that common. And so,
um, again, nothing wrong with it. One of the
points I make in my book is that humans
aren't really built for any one specific way of
being, and we're, we're inherently adaptable and flexible, including
socially, and we have evolved into this monogamy. You
know, monogamous kind of marriage situation, and it works
for many, many people. And I think that's, that's
fine. That's great, and it's been a successful social
structure, but it's not the only one that we're,
that is congruent with our biology. We could do,
we could make families in a whole variety of
ways, and other human societies have been doing that,
you know, since the dawn of time.
Yeah, I've had this conversation on the show with
many anthropologists by now. I mean, I remember, for
example, my conversation with the late Doctor Helen Fisher.
I mean, she falls more on the side of
saying that mon uh at least serial monogamy probably
is more natural, but then there are arguments in.
OF polygyny and then we also have polyandry. I
mean, it's all the evidence is all over the
place.
So, and I think that's the point that's telling
us something. The fact that the evidence is all
over the place tells us that there isn't one
answer to this, that humans are flexible and adaptable,
and that's our strength, actually, right? I mean, think
about it this way. What animal can live in
the desert, the tundra, the coastlines, temperate rainforests, tropical
rainforest? We can live in every single kind of
climate because we're not built for any one of
those. We're built to create what we need to
survive in any environment, and I would say socially
we have that same flexibility, and that's always been
our strength.
Yeah. So, of course, another topic that I want
to address here and I think, uh, I'm not
sure, but this is probably the first time I'm
about to ask an evolutionary biologist about this topic.
So, uh how do you approach uh transgender people
from a biological perspective?
Well, first of all, I think that transgender identity
and a feeling that one's gender expression doesn't match
with their biology at birth, I think that's normal
and natural. I think that we see that in
other animals in the way that they don't fit
their box always in various ways. Animals, whether based
on which gamete they make, they behave in ways
that doesn't fit our expectations for that gamete, right,
for that gamete producing body. Um, AND we see
that all the time. Sometimes, um, it's not successful.
It makes them not fit into the social group,
and so they, they wouldn't, you know, have offspring,
and, and pass that on. In other cases, they
do. Sometimes just being different is an advantage. Um,
IT makes you stick out from the crowd and
if everybody's trying to do one thing one way,
and you have a different way. Of being sometimes,
not always, sometimes that can be an advantage. And
so the way that I apply this to the
human experience of being transgender is, well, we have
sex biology. We have our, we have our bodies,
we have our gametes, we have our gonads, we
have our genitals. We also have behaviors, and those
behaviors stem from some sort of inner identity or
inner experience of our sexed body now. With nature
constantly producing diversity, it would also produce diversity in
that internal understanding. Why would that one thing be
spared from nature's tendency to create diversity, right? We
know that nature has created diversity with our sexed
bodies, so why not our sexed identities? Why would
that be any different? And what we've seen across
historical Periods and different geographic places all over the
world and all time periods, there's always been a
small but persistent percentage of these populations that don't
act in the expected way for their for their
sex. That's just, it's just a fact. You see
it everywhere. What we call transgender now has existed
in all times and places. It's a minority, but
it's there, and there also seems to be evidence
that it is somewhat genetic, but not purely. And
so you have this diversity that pops up in
people's inner understanding. Now, in our modern era, it
will look different than how it's expressed. 2000 years
ago in a hunter-gatherer tribe, because their experience of
masculinity and femininity will be different. It will always
be culturally dependent. What is masculine is besides our
bodies is defined by the culture at the time.
So in our current time and place when you
have access to hormone replacement therapy and surgery and
also just clothing, makeup, all of that, when you
have access to all of that. It's, to me,
it seems rather obvious that those with a discordant
sexual identity, which we call gender identity, would explore
that with the tools that they have available in
that culture. So, I gave one example, a very
simple example of a trans, what I think is
a transgender individual from 500 years ago. They didn't
have hormone therapy or surgery or anything like that
because that wasn't in the cultural toolkit at the
time, but they did. Um, CROSS-DRESS, if you will,
and cross-present as the opposite sex because in the
ways that were appropriate at that time and place,
what they had access to. So what, what, what
you saw was an internal gender identity or, or,
or gender discordance, if you will, that then found
expression. And this particular individual was able to live
a life and be successful and, and have incredible
adventures. She actually happened to be a pretty cruel
person. But that was made possible by this inner
gender identity. And you, before you say, well, then
anybody could do that, but they don't, right? So,
uh, the world for many centuries has been very
much more easy to navigate as a male than
a female, but you don't see droves and droves
of females just pretending to be male in order
to be successful. Because they don't have that inner
experience of feeling like a male. They might lament
the fact that they're females because females have so
much, you know, oppressive, um, you know, social baggage
put on them, but that doesn't make them feel
like a man. It makes them feel like an
oppressed female. But if you're a transgender individual with
a transgender identity, you have a way out of
that bucket into a bucket where you're more fit.
And like I said, animals that experiment with their
sex behaviors and sex biology is in line with
that same kind of The the sex, the understanding
of your own sexed body doesn't always match with
the sexed body, or there's variations thereof, and an
individual will find the way in which they feel
they most fit, human or animal, that transgender expression,
we always see, you know, small amounts of it
in basically every population.
Yeah, I, I guess that's one of the strongest
arguments in favor of there being, uh, I'm not
sure if it's a genetic predisposition or at least
a biological predisposition or a biological basis to transgender
identities is the fact that if, I mean, I
guess that all people who are transgender were raised
by. Their families and and other people in their
communities as the sex they were born as and
and still they develop that sort of transgender identity
and that gender incongruence and they say they identify
as the opposite sex, right? So I mean it's
a very strong feeling that people have.
Yeah, exactly. And that comes from somewhere, right? And
there are some who pathologize it and say that
it's a problem that must be fixed. But my
point is, why would you want to have that
as a default assumption, especially when you see how
common these things are throughout different societies and cultures,
when actually the easier thing to do is to
just let people be who they want to be,
right? And the, the pushback, sometimes, again, because we're
designed to want to pick a camp and and
find solidarity, sometimes the pushback, in my view, makes
everything worse for everyone, because then you force people
into a hardened sense of themselves that might still
be taking shape. So one of the things, you
know, if parents sometimes approach me and say, you
know, my child might be transgender, I don't know
what to do. And I always say, just let
them be. Just let them be. This, this could
be something that is fluid and, and, and, and
they move in and out of it, they might
end up in a different place than you're imagining.
Just let them be. And, and then without, cause
then they're not reacting against an oppression. There's always
a tendency to, to dig your heels in and
push back when someone tells you that they know
who you are more than you do, right? So,
let them be and let them explore who they're
gonna be. And I think that we see much
better outcomes in that way. Another thing I want
to say, and I make this point in the
book is that I think even further proof of
this is what it means to be transgender has
continued to evolve even over the last couple of
decades. So through the, you know, trans, trans, we
use the word transsexual through the 20th century, and
transsexuals actually were more accepted now than, excuse me,
than transgender, than transgender individuals now because transsexual meant
You really wanted to just be the other sex
and fully conform to it, leave everything masculine behind,
and adopt a fully feminine outward appearance. Well, what
we see now in transgender individuals is much more
fuzzy understanding of masculinity and femininity and kind of
mixing and matching and playing around and getting creative
with gender rather than just simply conforming. And that
seems to upset people most of all. Why? Because
the buckets, you don't fit in a bucket. A
transsexual individual is like, oh, OK, you don't want
to be in this bucket, so you're in that
one, but we still have the two buckets, so
everything's fine, everything's safe. Um, TRANSGENDER individuals are thinking
outside of the buckets more and more, not all,
right? I'm not, I don't want to paint them
with one brush. That's what I'm reacting against. But
the idea that Maybe some people don't fit in
these neat buckets at all. And why is that
a problem? Why not just let them be who
they're going to be? Um, AND it also, I
think, changes our own relationship with masculinity and femininity.
When you see, you know, otherwise masculine individuals playing
around with feminine fashions, we'll say, it makes the
whole category more expansive, and it gives that creativity,
that license to explore and create. And I think
that gender is One of the most fascinating things
that humans do, and I don't want to eliminate
that. Some people are like, oh, just eliminate gender.
No, gender is fun. You, you play around with
it and you interact with each other in these
cool and creative ways. And it's a, it's something
that, that animals do as well, right? Brightly colored
and dramatic behaviors, courtship behaviors, you know, gender is
one of those things that's, that's some of the
interesting, most interesting behaviors we do.
OK, so we have around 10 more minutes. I'm
going to ask you one question and if you,
if we still have time, another question. But let
me ask you this because I'm very interested in
your opinion. I mean, I, I've had a conversation
back in 2022 with the late great Doctor Franz
de Waal about his book Different Gender Through the
Eyes of a Primatologist, a very interesting book, by
the way. And the very interesting thing that he
told me is that uh there's only one species
where he sees. Individuals discriminating against non-typical behaviors against
same-sex behaviors against individuals who do not behave exactly
the same way as the typical male or the
typical female, and so on and so forth, and
that's humans. Humans seem to be the only species
that have that moralize these kinds of things and
discriminate against these people. So where do you think
that stems from?
So that's a great point, right? Because other animals,
we don't see, you know, policing around gender and
other things, but you do in humans. So my,
my idea in this is that humans evolved. First
of all, we have much larger brains, right? So
we are under social understanding, um, and, and complexity
of thought obviously is greater, but humans evolved and
where they gained a lot of what we think
of as uniquely human. During about a million, 1.5
million years in which small groups were competing against
one another, right? And this goes back to our
understanding of how generosity and mutual aid really evolved
in our species is that within a small group,
a very selfish individual will not, you know, will
have a hard time taking over that group. But
if he does, what You have is a selfish
group going against a cooperative group. The cooperative group
will win every time. So we're a species that
has evolved to be cooperative and to police selfishness,
at least a little bit, and to try to
keep everybody on the same team. And same team
is solidarity, mutual understanding, and that sense of social
identity. But a cohesive social identity requires other. So
this is the group and that is not the
group. So when these groups are competing against one
another, they establish an identity that's cohesive for this
group and exclusive of others, because remember, if everyone's
in the group, there isn't a group. A group
is defined by having some people in it and
not others. And so what that gave rise to
is racism, xenophobia, and all of that fear of
others that this person is different. They're not in
our group, and therefore they're an enemy. They're to
be feared. They're to be fought. And so when
you have social groups that were competing against one
another, the most successful groups had the strongest sense
of solidarity. The members would die for each other
in battle, right? If you imagine like early civilizations,
right? You had to convince members of your group
that it was, that the group was so important
that you would be willing to sacrifice yourself for
the good of the group. That's how strong our
sense of solidarity and group cohesion is. The dark
side. Solidarity is othering, right, xenophobia. And when you
apply gender nonconformity in that, it's the same concept.
You're like this violates the social order. This breaks
down group cohesion, and therefore it is to be
feared, it is to be loathed, it is to
be eliminated. It is to be oppressed. It is
to be suppressed, right? The best outcome, of course,
is just suppress it and hope it goes away.
But in my view, that's Where our reaction against
people who are different, because it's, it's not just
gender expression, right? If people who are different who
stick out in almost any way, can be the
victim of social violence and social exclusion. And so
it's part of a larger pattern of, hey, you
can't be too different because then you're not one
of us, you're, you're something else. So that's in
my view, that's where it comes from, is our
social history of cooperation and cohesion and solidarity.
OK, so what would you like for people to
take from your book? I mean, what would you
say is the main take in terms of, uh
uh uh, I mean, uh, would you like for
example, for people to have a better understanding or
perhaps being more empathetic toward people who are different
in terms of their sexual expression and so on?
Yeah, the main theme of the book is very
simple. Nature loves wondrous variety, right? And that's true
in almost every aspect of animals, whether it's morphology,
you know, how they look, and, but also behavior,
gender, sex, all of that, that variety is normal,
it's natural, and it's often adaptive. Um, SO I
go out of my way to choose examples in
the book where the diversity of a particular animal
makes that animal better in a sense. It makes
an animal fit in in a new way, right,
to offer something different to the group or have
a benefit for themselves. So the variety that we
see and that I talk about in the book
isn't a disadvantage. It doesn't put an animal at
at a disadvantage that it actually gives the animal
an edge. And so variety and difference, diversity. IS
good for us and it always has been. It's
always been a good thing. It's always been a
strength of the species to have a diverse population.
So you may fit the mold very typically for
your sex. You're a very masculine presenting male, attracted
to females, interested in monogamous kind of relationship, and
that's fine. The, the, the, the individuals that don't
fit one of those molds are no threat to
you. That, that's what I hope everyone sees is
that even if you're not a diverse individual, that's
a silly thing to say, but even if you're
not an individual that you would think of as
diverse, you're still in a group that's better off
for being diverse, right? And that diversity is not
a threat, um, even to those who are normies,
as we might say. Um, SO just learn to
love your neighbor and appreciate them for the beautifully
diverse things that they are, um, and to see
that we, we can look to other animals for
all the proof we need that this is normal,
natural, and indeed adaptive quite often.
Great. So the book is again The Sexual Evolution
of 500 Million Years of Sex, Gender and Mating
Shape Modern Relationships. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview. And Doctor Lentz,
just before we go, apart from the book, where
can people find you and your work on the
internet?
Um, I am, uh, online, on social media. I'm
very easy to find. Um, SO if you just
Google Nathan Lentz, I think I'm the only one
that has, uh, um, you know, social media accounts
and things, and I also answer emails. To be
honest, I, I, I, I'm not a fan of
social media. I, I, I, I, I kind of
wish, um, that we could move beyond it, uh,
as a way to interact. So, if you really
wanna get my attention, send me an email. I'm
easy to find that way too, and I respond
to all emails that are polite. Working in the
space, you get some nasty emails, but, um, uh,
yeah, I like to interact. I love to hear
what people think of my work and my book,
and, um, uh, please reach out and I, I,
I'm always looking to build new relationships.
Great. Thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a fascinating
conversation.
Thanks very much, Ricardo, and you're always a great
interviewer. I love it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, John
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.